[244]
ently evident that they didn't understand a word. And OK, you can't
fault the totally negative responses—or the vapid ones either, since
they pretty much correspond with the percentage of editors you know
are C students to begin with. But it's the other third that really cause
grief. I mean when the letters practically sound like Nobel Prize cita-
tions—"brilliant," "twenty years ahead of its time," "we're honored
that you thought of us"...
JT: And?
DM: The predictable kicker, of course. It won't sell. Or worse, we
couldn't get it past the salespeople. Actually acknowledging that
those semiliterates don't simply participate in the editorial process,
but dictate its decisions. God almighty.
I began corresponding with Markson in 1984, met him shortly
after, and in the autumn of 1987 was allowed to read the manu-
script of the novel. I loved it, and since I was just then talking
with John O'Brien about joining his Daley Archive Press, I
suggested that Markson send it there. That he did and, with no
aesthetic obtuseness or commercial considerations hindering
the process, the novel was immediately accepted and published
the following May. It was widely and favorably reviewed, went
through two printings in hardcover, then several more in paper-
back, and was published in England and (in translation) in Spain
and France. The novel has been the subject of several scholarly
essays and has become a staple of college classes in contempo-
rary fiction (and even the occasional philosophy class).
Fifty-four rejections.
...
At first glance, Wittgenstein's Mistress seems to have little in
common with Markson's previous work—or anyone else's, for
that matter. (The nearest precedent for it might be Charlotte
Perkins Gilman's 1892 story "The Yellow Wallpaper," also
narrated in short paragraphs by a woman seesawing between
sanity and madness, with a fertile if disordered imagination.) It
has the least amount of dramatic activity of all of his novels,
being (at the simplest level) the rambling meditations of a
/