[246]
Anna Karenina, and where Willem de Kooning wears a soccer
jersey in Giotto's Renaissance studio. Kate lives in a world of
cultural relativity similar to the physical one described by Ein-
stein and the historical one described by recent historians, who
likewise have realized that history is not an objective set of
facts but a subjective welter of interpretations.
Kate's attempts to order her cultural memories are often ear-
nest, often comic: for example, the reason Euripides sounds as
though he'd been influenced by Shakespeare is that she's read
Gilbert Murray's Shakespearean translation of The Trojan
Women; so Kate wonders if a bookstore she enters in Athens
has "a Greek edition of William Shakespeare's plays. By a
translator who had been under the influence of Euripides" (45).
This is as funny as it is profound, upsetting traditional notions
of influence and the transmission of culture while at the same
time being perfectly plausible. (And note the Jack Benny pause
between those two sentences; Kate has a deliciously dry wit
that, like Springer's, rescues her from many potentially maud-
lin moments.) Sometimes it takes her several pages (and several
weeks) to complete a tantalizing connection: on page 12, for
example, she relates the fact that the British painter Turner once
"had himself lashed to the mast of a ship for several hours, dur-
ing a furious storm, so that he could later paint the storm." This
reminds her of something, but she can't remember what. Then
on page 83 she thinks about the scene in the Odyssey in which
"Odysseus has himself lashed to the mast of his ship, so that he / 4
can listen to the Sirens singing but will stay put." Again she is
reminded of something but can't say what. Finally, a hundred
pages (and many weeks) later, Kate writes:
Have I ever said that Turner once actually had himself lashed to the
mast of a ship, to be able to later do a painting of a storm?
Which has never failed to remind me of the scene in which
Odysseus does the'identical thing, of course, so that he can listen to
the Sirens singing but will stay put. (189-90) 4