[247]
Other times the connection is never made, like the one Kate sus-
pects exists between Lawrence of Arabia and T. E. Shaw; she
comes so close so often to making the link that the reader wants
to shout it out at her as though in the audience of a game show.
Kate's cultural allusions also differ from the usual ones in
that more emphasis is placed on the artist than on the work, es-
pecially on the kinds of personal and domestic details that are
usually ignored. When she cites Maupassant, for example, it is
not to allude to one of his stories but to remember that he liked
to row and ate his lunch at the Eiffel Tower because that was the
only place in Paris from which he couldn't see the monument.
The first half of the novel is filled with such trivia, but midway
Kate's references begin to take a different turn and emphasize
the darker side of the lives of cultural figures, noting those who
went mad, were forced into exile or poverty, who committed
suicide, went blind, and so on. Here a reference to Maupassant
will hint (111) and then state (234) that he ended up crawling
about on all fours and eating his own excrement. "Even though
the work itself lasts, of course," Kate reminds herself. "Or does
thinking about the work itself while knowing these things
somehow sadden one even more?" (139). A sense of futility
hangs over culture and history as Kate attempts to sort all this
out, tempting the reader to equate Western civilization's great-
est works of art and philosophy with the futile messages Kate
leaves in the street or, better yet, with the messages she leaves
in sand, washed away almost before she can complete them.
The culmination of this train of thought is the mournful litany
near the end of the book for all those who succumbed to the
Siren song of art, as destructive as it is seductive, as well as for
those who were victims of more mundane miseries:
God, poor Maupassant.
Well, but poor Friedrich Nietzsche, too, actually.
If not to mention poor Vivaldi while I am at it also, since I now
remember that he died in an almshouse.